Classification and characterization of anthropogenic plant communities
in the northwestern Iberian Peninsula
================

# Abstract (300 words max.)

- *Questions* Can we reconcile regional and European classifications of
  anthropogenic plant communities at the biogeographical scale? How are
  these communities characterized by species origins, traits and
  ecological preferences?

- *Location* Atlantic territories in the NW Iberian Peninsula (a.k.a.
  Cantabrian Mixed Forests ecoregion); south-western Europe.

- *Methods* We classified 2,508 plots with the aim of being consistent
  with regional phytosociological expertise, while matching that
  expertise with current EuroVegChecklist alliances. We used modified
  TWINSPAN to revise the original phytosociological classification,
  followed by semi-supervised re-classification of the whole dataset. We
  determined the proportion of natives, archaeophytes and neophytes. We
  also described the alliances in terms of species traits (lifeforms,
  height and flowering phenology) and ecological requirements
  (temperature, moisture, light, nutrients, soil reaction, disturbance
  frequency and severity).

- *Results* We assigned 2,086 vegetation plots to 25 anthropogenic
  alliances representing 9 vegetation classes (*Cymbalario-Parietarietea
  diffusae*, *Polygono-Poetea annuae*, *Papaveretea rhoeadis*,
  *Digitario sanguinalis-Eragrostietea minoris*, *Chenopodietea*,
  *Sisymbrietea*, *Bidentetea*, *Artemisietea vulgaris* and *Epilobietea
  angustifolii*). The plots included 1,149 species: 78% natives, 15%
  archaeophytes and 7% neophytes. Vegetation groups were organized along
  a principal axis of abiotic stress (dry-sunny to moist-shady habitats)
  and a secondary axis of disturbance.

- *Conclusions* In the Iberian Atlantic territories, anthropogenic
  habitats host one third of the regional plant species pool and one
  fifth of the Iberian flora. Mesic perennial ruderal vegetation is
  especially rich in native species and can be a biodiversity asset in
  urban landscapes. Our biogeographical-level synthesis can improve the
  management of anthropogenic plant communities and contribute towards a
  European-level synthesis of human-made vegetation.

# Keywords (10 max)

Synanthropic vegetation, manmade habitats, human-made habitats, urban
biodiversity, neophytes, archaeophytes, alien plants, habitat
classification, semi-supervised classification, Cantabrian Mixed Forests

# Introduction

Anthropogenic vegetation is the sum of plant communities assembled as a
direct consequence of human activities. In general, this vegetation is
composed of the so-called weeds of arable fields and the ruderal plants
growing on human settlements and nearby habitats ([Lososová & Simonová
2008](#ref-RN5441)). In densely populated landscapes, the anthropogenic
communities that colonize vacant lots ([Johnson et al.
2017](#ref-RN2300)) are a useful natural resource with high ecological
and societal potential ([Anderson & Minor 2017](#ref-RN5446); [Kowarik
2018](#ref-RN5445)). Anthropogenic vegetation can also mitigate
regional-level extreme climatic events ([Stefanon et al.
2014](#ref-RN5440)). Furthermore, many synanthropic plants are adapted
to disturbance and can accumulate heavy metals in their biomass
([Kostryukova et al. 2017](#ref-RN5433)), making them valuable
candidates for nature-based solutions such as bioremediation and
restoration of degraded post-industrial landscapes ([Song et al.
2019](#ref-RN5447)).

In temperate Europe, anthropogenic vegetation is a melting pot of floras
from different biogeographical origins. The starting native pool of
species favored by humans has been constantly enriched by human-assisted
arrival of alien (i.e. non-native) species ([Pokorná et al.
2018](#ref-RN5504)). The introduction of archaeophytes (i.e. alien
species arriving before 1.500 CE) likely started in the early Neolithic
and peaked in the Bronze Age, with successive waves during periods of
accelerated human colonization such as the early Middle Ages ([Pokorná
et al. 2018](#ref-RN5504)). In Europe, synanthropic archaeophytes
include many Mediterranean taxa originating from the segetal flora of
the Near East ([Zohary 1950](#ref-RN5494)). Some of these archaeophytes
are ‘obligate weeds’ that do not occur in non-anthropogenic habitats and
are assumed to have evolved together with human agriculture ([Zohary
1950](#ref-RN5494)). The synanthropic flora of Europe has been further
enriched by neophytes, alien taxa that arrived after the expansion of
intercontinental trade in the Modern Age (after 1.500 CE) ([Brun
2009](#ref-RN5439); [Lenzner et al. 2022](#ref-RN5451)). In the last
century, the European anthropogenic vegetation has shown a decrease in
species richness and diversity ([Pyšek et al. 2004](#ref-RN5423)), as
rare synanthropic species have become rarer and neophytes have increased
their abundance at the expense of natives and archaeophytes ([Lososová &
Simonová 2008](#ref-RN5441)).

Despite the potential of anthropogenic vegetation as a biodiversity
asset in human-made landscapes and its ecological interest as an
assemblage of species pools from different biogeographical origins,
human-made vegetation is largely absent from ecosystem management. A
comprehensive management will require a solid definition, classification
and description of anthropogenic plant communities. However, the
classification of anthropogenic vegetation is subject to particularities
making it a special case compared to the classification of
non-anthropogenic communities. In human-made habitats, the traditional
understanding of community assembly based on sequential filtering
(dispersal, abiotic and biotic) must incorporate an additional filtering
based on human preferences and actions ([Swan et al.
2021](#ref-RN5505)). Human landscapes are a mosaic of land uses
([Pauleit & Breuste 2011](#ref-RN5527)), having specific effects on
plant community assembly and driven by sociological rather than
traditional ecological factors ([Johnson et al. 2017](#ref-RN2300)).
Another issue is defining anthropogenic vegetation, especially in a
continent such as Europe where human impact on the landscape has been
widespread since ancient times. The two major vegetation/habitat
classifications coexisting in Europe today, phytosociological
classification ([Mucina et al. 2016](#ref-RN4698)) and the EUNIS habitat
classification ([Chytrý et al. 2020](#ref-RN5061)), have not fully
equivalent definitions of which plant communities fall within their
‘anthropogenic’ or ‘manmade’ categories. These issues are further
muddled by the fact that most classification studies of anthropogenic
vegetation have focused either on a restricted political unit ([Němec et
al. 2011](#ref-RN5426); [Tabašević, Jovanović, et al.
2021](#ref-RN5424)) or in a subset of the vegetation, such as segetal
([Zohary 1950](#ref-RN5494)), ruderal ([Zaliberová 1995](#ref-RN5422))
or trampled ([Golovanov et al. 2023](#ref-RN5434)) vegetation. There is
a need for a numerical classification and synthesis of the full spectrum
of anthropogenic vegetation, focusing on coherent biogeographical units,
i.e. areas with a similar bioclimate, a shared biogeographic history and
recurrent local ecosystems ([Bailey 2004](#ref-RN5491)).

The Atlantic territories in the NW Iberian Peninsula (a.k.a. Cantabrian
Mixed Forests ecoregion) have a long history of human habitation dating
back to the Cantabrian Upper Paleolithic ([Straus 2005](#ref-RN5450)).
This, together with their transitional position at the border between
the temperate and Mediterranean climatic zones of Europe, suggests a
long regional history for archaeophyte-rich anthropogenic plant
communities, supporting the current diverse anthropogenic vegetation
with both temperate and Mediterranean floristic elements ([Díaz González
2020](#ref-RN5008)). Moreover, historical trade links with America and
Asia, together with the warm and humid temperate climate, have made the
region a hotspot for biological invasions ([Fernández de Castro et al.
2018](#ref-RN5492); [Lázaro-Lobo et al. 2024](#ref-RN5493)). Recent
post-industrial land-use changes have left large areas with abandoned
industrial sites (i.e. brownfields) whose management and restoration
requires an understanding of the anthropogenic communities able to
colonize them ([Gallego et al. 2016](#ref-RN5448); [Matanzas et al.
2021](#ref-RN5449)). Although there is a long tradition of studying weed
and ruderal communities within the area ([Aedo et al.
1988](#ref-RN5364); [Díaz González et al. 1988](#ref-RN5360); [Loidi &
Navarro Aranda 1988](#ref-RN5591); [Penas Merino, Díaz González, García
González, et al. 1988](#ref-RN5359); [Penas Merino, Díaz González, Pérez
Morales, et al. 1988](#ref-RN5361); [Loidi et al. 1995](#ref-RN5590);
[Loidi et al. 1996](#ref-RN5589)) there is a current need for a
biogeographical-level synthesis that revises and updates the
classification in accord with recent developments in European vegetation
science ([Mucina et al. 2016](#ref-RN4698)) and habitat classification
([Chytrý et al. 2020](#ref-RN5061)). In this article, we have performed
such a synthesis with the following two objectives: (1) to provide an
updated classification at the alliance level of anthropogenic plant
communities in the Iberian Atlantic territories; and (2) to characterize
the diversity of anthropogenic vegetation in terms of species pools
(natives, archaeophytes, neophytes); species traits (life form, plant
height, flowering phenology); and ecological requirements (temperature,
moisture, light, nutrients, soil reaction, disturbance frequency and
disturbance severity).

# Methods

## Data curation and taxonomic criteria

We performed all data management and analysis with R version 4.3.1 ([R
Core Team 2023](#ref-RN5387)), using the R package *tidyverse* ([Wickham
et al. 2019](#ref-RN4662)) for data processing and visualization. We
homogenized all taxon names using Euro+Med ([Euro+Med
2006](#ref-RN5044)) or Plants of the World Online ([POWO
2023](#ref-RN5376)) for taxa not in Euro+Med. For the nomenclature of
syntaxa, we followed Mucina *et al.* ([2016](#ref-RN4698)) for alliances
and higher ranks and Rivas-Martínez *et al.* ([2001](#ref-RN4697)) for
associations. The original datasets, as well as R code for analysis and
creation of the manuscript, are stored in a GitHub repository available
at Zenodo (see ‘Data availability statement’).

## Biogeographical territory under study

We studied the anthropogenic plant communities of the Iberian Atlantic
territories, a biogeographical unit defined by Fernández Prieto *et al.*
([2020](#ref-RN5372); [2023](#ref-RN5588)) as the territories with a
temperate climate in the north-western part of the Iberian Peninsula (NW
Portugal, N Spain, SW France). Our study area follows the detailed
borders provided by Fernández Prieto *et al.* ([2020](#ref-RN5372);
[2023](#ref-RN5588)) and is broadly equivalent to the Cantabrian Mixed
Forests ecoregion *sensu* Olson *et al.* ([2001](#ref-RN4667)), to the
Iberian part of the European Atlantic province *sensu* Rivas-Martínez
*et al.* ([2014](#ref-RN5592); [2017](#ref-RN4699)) (i.e. the
Orocantabrian subprovince and parts of the Cantabro Atlantic
subprovince) and to the Iberian section of the Atlantic biogeographical
region of the European Environmental Agency
(<https://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/figures/biogeographical-regions-in-europe-2>).

## Definition of anthropogenic vegetation

To circumscribe our study vegetation, we followed the definition of
anthropogenic vegetation in the revised classification of the vegetation
of Europe by Mucina *et al.* ([2016](#ref-RN4698)). In our study area,
this potentially includes the vegetation classes *Polygono-Poetea
annuae*, *Papaveretea rhoeadis*, *Digitario sanguinalis-Eragrostietea
minoris*, *Chenopodietea*, *Sisymbrietea*, *Bidentetea*, *Artemisietea
vulgaris* and *Epilobietea angustifolii* (which includes
*Galio-Urticetea*). For the sake of completeness, we also considered the
class *Cymbalario-Parietarietea diffusae* included by Mucina *et al.*
([2016](#ref-RN4698)) in the vegetation of rock crevices and screes,
since this class encompasses the vegetation of human-made walls.

## Checklist of anthropogenic syntaxa

To assist in our classification, we prepared a checklist of
anthropogenic syntaxa that could be present in our study area
(**Appendix S1**), based on regional syntaxonomical checklists ([Izco et
al. 2000](#ref-RN5363); [Díaz González 2020](#ref-RN5008); [Durán Gómez
2020](#ref-RN5365)) and recent revisions at the European level ([Mucina
et al. 2016](#ref-RN4698); [Preislerová et al. 2022](#ref-RN5371)). This
syntaxonomical checklist included 34 anthropogenic vegetation alliances
that could be present in the Iberian Atlantic territories according to
the literature.

## Vegetation data selection

We retrieved Iberian Atlantic anthropogenic vegetation plots from the
Iberian and Macaronesian Vegetation Information System (SIVIM) ([Font et
al. 2012](#ref-RN5374)). To identify plots as anthropogenic, we selected
those plots that had been assigned by the original authors of the plot
into any anthropogenic syntaxa in our syntaxonomical checklist. However,
since not all plots in SIVIM have an assigned syntaxon, we also
retrieved additional plots using the expert system created by Chytrý *et
al.* ([2020](#ref-RN5061)) to classify vegetation plots into EUNIS
pan-European habitat types. We retrieved plots that had been assigned to
any habitat related to the anthropogenic vegetation classes we had
previously defined: all habitats in the level 1 code *V Vegetated
man-made habitats*, plus level 3 codes *R55 Lowland moist or wet
tall-herb and fern fringe* and *R57 Herbaceous forest clearing
vegetation*. It must be noted that habitats *R55* and *R57* include
communities that are classified as *R Grasslands and lands dominated by
forbs, mosses or lichens* by EUNIS but as *Anthropogenic vegetation* by
Mucina *et al.* ([2016](#ref-RN4698)). The extraction of data from SIVIM
produced an initial pool of 3,160 vegetation plots, to which we added 89
vegetation plots of urban or peri-urban plant communities sampled by us
or extracted from local literature not included in SIVIM ([Zabaleta
Mendizábal 1990](#ref-RN5377); [Uría Arizaga 2020](#ref-RN5378)).

## Vegetation data cleaning

We performed an exploratory data analysis of these 3,249 plots using
modified Two-Way Indicator Species Analysis (TWINSPAN) ([Roleček et al.
2009](#ref-RN5379)) with the R package *twinspanR* ([Zelený
2021](#ref-RN5380)). We used 3 pseudospecies cut levels (0, 15, 25), a
minimum group size of 10 plots and Sørensen’s average dissimilarity.
During this analysis we identified 741 outlier plots which did not
belong to either the target anthropogenic vegetation or to the
geographical area of the Iberian Atlantic territories. The majority of
these plots corresponded to coastal plant communities and had been
misclassified by the expert system. We removed these plots, resulting in
a dataset of 2,508 vegetation plots for data analysis: 2,419 plots from
SIVIM, originally recorded in 89 publications (**Appendix S2**); plus 89
plots added by us.

## Training dataset for semi-supervised classification and validation of alliances

The main aim of our classification was for it to be consistent with
regional phytosociological expertise and to match that expertise with
current EuroVegChecklist alliances ([Mucina et al. 2016](#ref-RN4698)).
To achieve this, one advantage of using the SIVIM database is that a
majority of the plots had been assigned to associations or alliances by
the original authors ([Font et al. 2012](#ref-RN5374)). However, there
could be misclassification due to unclear concepts or human error.
Therefore, we used TWINSPAN to revise the classification by the original
authors, to define the number of clusters that better aligned with our
syntaxonomical checklist and to remove outliers or misclassified plots.
We started this stage of the analyses by keeping only those plots (n =
2,095) that had been assigned by the original authors of the plot to any
of the 9 anthropogenic vegetation classes defined in our syntaxonomical
checklist (i.e., we removed the plots without syntaxa, that had been
retrieved solely by the expert system). Then, we performed a TWINSPAN
classification (with the same settings as above) within each vegetation
class, attempting to classify its plots into a number of clusters equal
to the number of alliances of that class in our checklist. We assigned
the resulting clusters to an alliance in our checklist based on their
composition of diagnostic species as described in the regional
literature. In some cases, this resulted in a classification into a
number of clusters in which (1) more than one cluster was assigned to
the same alliance in the checklist; and (2) some alliances in the
checklist could not be assigned to any of the clusters (i.e. the plots
that had been assigned by the original authors to that alliance were
separated in different clusters). This stage of the analyses allowed us
to identify those plots in which there was an agreement between (1) our
TWINSPAN-based classification (i.e. numerical classification) and (2)
the classification based on the original author’s syntaxon
(i.e. regional phytosociological expertise). These plots (n = 1,850)
were the best representatives of each alliance and became our training
dataset for semi-supervised classification.

## Semi-supervised classification

Next, we conducted a semi-supervised classification ([Tichý et al.
2014](#ref-RN5593)) of the whole dataset (n = 2,508 plots) into 25
TWINSPAN-validated anthropogenic alliances. Semi-supervised
classification uses a training subset of *a priori* classified
vegetation plots to classify a secondary subset of unclassified plots
([De Cáceres et al. 2010](#ref-RN5383)). Since our goal was to refine
the classification of the whole dataset, we allowed plots from the
training subset to be re-assigned to other alliances during the
re-classification. In addition, semi-supervised classification can
create new groups to place data points that do not match the already
existing *a priori* groups, but attempts to do so resulted in new groups
with no ecological significance and thus we kept the 25 alliances as
final anthropogenic vegetation groups. Furthermore, we applied a noise
clustering fuzzy algorithm, which allows plots to be classified either
into the *a priori* alliances or into a *noise* group which includes
outliers and transitional plots ([Wiser & De Cáceres
2013](#ref-RN5382)). We set the fuzziness coefficient to a low value (m
= 1) to accommodate a high number of transitional plots; and we set the
distance to the noise class to d = 1. We performed this analysis with
the R package *vegclust* ([De Cáceres et al. 2010](#ref-RN5383)). The
semi-supervised classification with noise clustering resulted in the
final classification of 2,086 plots into 26 alliances and 422 plots left
out in the noise group. We used pairwise PERMANOVA (with 100,000
iterations, Euclidean distances and Holm’s p-value correction) fitted
with the R package *RVAideMemoire* ([Herve 2023](#ref-RN5381)) to test
the significance of the final vegetation alliances; along with Principal
Component Analysis (PCA) as implemented in the R package *FactoMineR*
([Lê et al. 2008](#ref-RN3166)) to visualize the relationships between
the classes and alliances.

## Characteristic species and EUNIS habitat correspondence

To facilitate the use of the classification by local managers and
environmental consultants, we calculated sets of characteristic species
([Chytrý et al. 2020](#ref-RN5061)) for each one of the final 25
vegetation alliances. We defined dominant species as species with more
than 25% cover in at least 5% of the vegetation plots of the group;
constant species as species with a frequency higher than 50% in the
group; and diagnostic species as species whose *IndVal* had a p-value
lower than 0.05, as calculated with the R package *labdsv* ([Roberts
2016](#ref-RN2311)) using 1.000.000 iterations. Additionally, we
assigned to each alliance a regionalized level 4 EUNIS habitat code
(<https://eunis.eea.europa.eu/habitats-code-browser-revised.jsp>).

## Species origin as native, archaeophyte or neophyte

We classified the species as native, archaeophytes or neophytes in the
Iberian Atlantic territories. Information for archaeophyte status in the
Iberian Peninsula is scarce and inconsistent. Therefore, we used the
catalogues of archaeophytes for Britain ([Preston et al.
2004](#ref-RN5490)) and the Czech Republic ([Pyšek et al.
2022](#ref-RN5626)) to create a starting list of species that are
considered archaeophytes in those countries. Then, we used *Flora
iberica* ([1987-2020](#ref-RN3243)) to remove from that list those
species that are considered native in the Mediterranean part of the
Iberian Peninsula. We classified the remaining species as archaeophytes
in the Iberian Atlantic territories. Nonetheless, we must stress that
identifying archaeophytes in southern Europe is highly problematic
([Celesti‐Grapow et al. 2009](#ref-RN5444)) and our classification must
be taken as an indication of putative archaeophyte character, solely for
the purposes of vegetation comparison with other European regions,
rather than a definitive classification of the species; as stated by
Preston *et al.* ([Preston et al. 2004](#ref-RN5490)), the
classification of a species as an archaeophyte should be interpreted as
a hypothesis to be tested by further studies.

## Species life form, height and flowering phenology

We extracted the species’ life forms from *FloraVeg.EU*
([2023](#ref-RN5385)). From *Flora iberica* ([1987-2020](#ref-RN3243))
we extracted the maximum height, median month of flowering and length of
the flowering period of each species in the dataset. We used these
variables to calculate plot-level community-weighted means (weighting by
species cover) for each trait, to characterize the vegetation height and
flowering phenology of the anthropogenic plant communities.

## Species ecological indicator values

For each species in the dataset, we collected its ecological indicator
values of temperature, moisture, light, nutrients and soil reaction
([Dengler et al. 2023](#ref-RN5488)); and its disturbance frequency and
severity indicator values ([Midolo et al. 2023](#ref-RN5101)). To those
species lacking an indicator value in the accessed references, we
assigned a value by reciprocal averaging, i.e. by (1) calculating
weighted average values of the species with values for each plot
(weighting by species cover) and (2) assigning to the missing species
the weighted average values of the plots where they were present
(weighting by species cover). Then, for each vegetation plot, we
calculated the plot-level mean of each indicator value.

# Results

## Overview of the classification

The semi-supervised classification resulted in the classification of
2,086 vegetation plots into 25 anthropogenic alliances (**Fig. 1**,
description of the alliances and translation into EUNIS habitat types in
**Appendix S3**, groups of characteristic species in **Appendix S4**,
synoptic table in **Appendix S5**) representing 9 vegetation classes. Of
the 34 alliances in our initial syntaxonomical checklist, nine alliances
were not assigned to any cluster. Of these, eight had been assigned to a
few plots by the original authors: *Onopordion castellani* (n = 6
plots), *Onopordion acanthii* (5), *Euphorbion prostratae* (4),
*Caucalidion lappulae* (4), *Roemerion hybridae* (2), *Hordeion murini*
(2), *Taeniathero-Aegilopion geniculatae* (1) and *Fragarion vescae*
(1). The alliance *Aegopodion podagrariae* had been assigned by the
original authors to 39 plots, but our TWINSPAN analysis could not
separate this alliance from the alliances *Geo urbani-Alliarion
officinalis* and *Balloto-Conion maculati*. The regional literature
included in our dataset recognized 69 associations (**Appendix S6**)
within the final 25 alliances, but exploratory analysis (not shown)
indicated that the separation of these associations within the alliances
had a generally weak support based on numerical classification methods.

The classified plots included 1,149 species. The 10 most frequent
species were *Ochlopoa annua* (625 occurrences), *Urtica dioica* (588),
*Sonchus oleraceus* (548), *Stellaria media* (520), *Capsella
bursa-pastoris* (396), *Polygonum aviculare* (373), *Dactylis glomerata*
(369), *Senecio vulgaris* (336) and *Anisantha sterilis* (310).
Considering only those plots with the most frequent plot size range (20
m<sup>2</sup>, n = 260 plots), the average species richness per plot was
16 (minimum = 3, maximum = 37). The class with the richest species pool
was *Epilobietea angustifolii* (n = 605) and the poorest was
*Bidentetea* (n = 132).

PCA ordination of the floristic composition (**Fig. 2A**) differentiated
three vegetation groups: (1) trampled vegetation of class
*Polygono-Poetea annuae*; (2) crop weeds of classes *Papaveretea
rhoeadis* and *Digitario sanguinalis-Eragrostietea minoris*; and (3)
perennial ruderal vegetation of classes *Artemisietea vulgaris* and
*Epilobietea angustifolii*. The central position of the floristic space,
between these three major groups, was occupied by the annual ruderal
vegetation of classes *Chenopodietea*, *Sisymbrietea* and *Bidentetea*;
as well as by the wall vegetation of class *Cymbalario-Parietarietea
diffusae*. Separate PCAs within the major vegetation groups indicated a
coherent separation between most of the alliances, but with some cases
of relatively high overlap, especially between *Galio
valantiae-Parietarion judaicae* and *Cymbalario-Asplenion*.

## Proportion of natives, archaeophytes and neophytes

The total synanthropic species pool (n = 1,149) was composed of 78%
natives (n = 899), 15% putative archaeophytes (n = 174) and 7% neophytes
(n = 76). The most frequent putative archaeophytes were *Capsella
bursa-pastoris* (396 occurrences), *Senecio vulgaris* (336), *Anisantha
sterilis* (310), *Hordeum murinum* (297), *Anthemis arvensis* (290),
*Raphanus raphanistrum* (236), *Vicia sativa* (229), *Malva sylvestris*
(210), *Sisymbrium officinale* (185) and *Anisantha diandra* (175);
while the most frequent neophytes were *Veronica persica* (215),
*Erigeron canadensis* (136), *Amaranthus hybridus* (75), *Oxalis
corniculata* (66), *Lepidium didymum* (59), *Oxalis latifolia* (56),
*Paspalum distichum* (42), *Bidens frondosus* (34), *Cyperus eragrostis*
(34) and *Symphyotrichum squamatum* (34).

By vegetation class, *Epilobietea angustifolii* had the highest
proportion of natives in its species pool (82%); *Sisymbrietea* had the
highest proportion of putative archaeophytes (30%); and *Bidentetea* had
the highest proportion of neophytes (16%). The alliances with the
highest proportions of archaeophytes in their species pools were
*Chenopodion muralis* (35%%), *Silybo mariani-Urticion piluliferae*
(31%) and *Sisymbrion officinalis* (30%); while the alliances with the
highest proportion of neophytes were *Bidention tripartitae* (20%),
*Allion triquetri* (12%) and *Spergulo arvensis-Erodion cicutariae*
(11%).

At the community level, focusing on plot average proportions (**Fig.
3**), the alliances with the most archaeophytes were *Sisymbrion
officinalis*, *Silybo mariani-Urticion piluliferae* and *Spergulo
arvensis-Erodion cicutariae*, in which only about half of the plot-level
proportion was made up of native species. The alliances with the highest
plot-level proportion of neophytes were *Bidention tripartitae*,
*Paspalo-Agrostion semiverticillati* and *Spergulo arvensis-Erodion
cicutariae*. Some alliances had high proportions of native species,
e.g. *Epilobion angustifolii*, *Linario polygalifoliae-Vulpion
alopecuri* and *Arction lappae*.

## Community-level traits

The most frequent life form in the species pool (n = 1,149 species) were
hemicryptophytes (44%), followed by therophytes (41%), geophytes (8%),
chamaephytes (6%), phanerophytes (5%), bryophytes (1%, not consistently
recorded in all plots) and hydrophytes (1%). The proportion of
therophytes across classes and alliances (**Fig. 4**) agreed with the
traditional description of the syntaxa: therophytes dominated the annual
communities of trampled-soil vegetation (*Polygono-Poetea annuae*),
crops weeds (*Papaveretea rhoeadis*, *Digitario
sanguinalis-Eragrostietea minoris*) and annual ruderals
(*Chenopodietea*, *Sisymbrietea*, *Bidentetea*); while perennial life
forms (especially hemicryptophytes) dominated walls
(*Cymbalario-Parietarietea diffusae*) and perennial ruderal vegetation
(*Artemisietea vulgaris*, *Epilobietea angustifolii*). Geophytes
represented a relatively high proportion of the vegetation in two
alliances: *Allion triquetri* and *Senecionion fluviatilis*.

Community-weighted means for plant height (**Fig. 5A**) also agreed with
the expected description of the syntaxa: the shortest communities were
the dwarf-herb vegetation of trampled sites (*Polygono-Poetea annuae*,
average height = 45.2 cm) and crop weeds (*Papaveretea rhoeadis*, 55.6
cm), while the tallest were the perennial ruderal vegetation of dry
(*Artemisietea vulgaris*, 131 cm) and mesic (*Epilobietea angustifolii*,
138 cm) sites. The median month of flowering (**Fig. 5B**) corresponded
to May (*Sisymbrietea*, *Chenopodietea*, *Papaveretea rhoeadis*), June
(*Cymbalario-Parietarietea diffusae*, *Polygono-Poetea annuae*,
*Epilobietea angustifolii*, *Artemisietea vulgaris*) or July (*Digitario
sanguinalis-Eragrostietea minoris*, *Bidentetea*). The length of the
flowering season (**Fig. 5C**) was generally high, from 5 months
(*Artemisietea vulgaris*, *Epilobietea angustifolii*) to 6
(*Chenopodietea*, *Sisymbrietea*), 7 (*Bidentetea*, *Digitario
sanguinalis-Eragrostietea minoris*, *Papaveretea rhoeadis*), 8
(*Polygono-Poetea annuae*) or 9 (*Cymbalario-Parietarietea diffusae*).

## Community-level ecological preferences

To visualize the major patterns of variation in the ecological and
disturbance preferences of the different anthropogenic communities
(**Fig. 6**) we performed a PCA ordination of plot-level means (**Fig.
7**). The first two PCA axes explained 59% of the variance. The major
contributors to axis 1 (36% variance explained) were light, nutrient and
moisture requirements; it separated communities of open, dry and
comparatively nutrient-poorer sites (classes *Papaveretea rhoeadis*,
*Polygono-Poetea annuae*, *Sisymbrietea*, *Artemisietea vulgaris*,
*Chenopodietea* and *Digitario sanguinalis-Eragrostietea minoris*) from
communities of shady, moist and nutrient-richer sites (classes
*Bidentetea* and *Epilobietea angustifolii*). The major contributors to
axis 2 (23% variance explained) were disturbance severity and frequency;
this axis separated communities preferring less severe and less frequent
disturbances (classes *Cymbalario-Parietarietea diffusae*, *Epilobietea
angustifolii*) from communities adapted to more severe and more frequent
disturbances (classes *Papaveretea rhoeadis*, *Polygono-Poetea annuae*,
*Sisymbrietea* and *Digitario sanguinalis-Eragrostietea minoris*).

# Discussion

Our synthesis of the anthropogenic vegetation of the northwestern
Iberian Peninsula has detected a discrepancy between the number of
vegetation units described in the literature (i.e. 34 alliances) and the
number supported by numerical classification (25 alliances). Our
classification supported that anthropogenic vegetation can be broadly
divided into three groups belonging to trampled, weed and ruderal
communities. These groups are organized along a principal axis of
variation related to abiotic stress and a second axis related to
disturbance. These two axes determine the characteristics of the
communities in terms of species origins and species traits. This
synthesis allows for a better understanding of anthropogenic vegetation,
as a first step towards a better integration of this biodiversity asset
into ecosystem management and nature-based solutions.

## Vegetation and habitat classification of anthropogenic communities

Our analysis supports the existence of 25 anthropogenic alliances in the
vegetation of the Iberian Atlantic territories. While the core of this
vegetation diversity is made up of temperate European alliances, these
are enriched by the occurrence of eight Mediterranean alliances (*Galio
valantiae-Parietarion judaicae*, *Polycarpion tetraphylli*, *Allion
triquetri*, *Chenopodion muralis*, *Echio-Galactition tomentosae*,
*Paspalo-Agrostion semiverticillati*, *Silybo mariani-Urticion
piluliferae* and *Balloto-Conion maculati*); plus three alliances that
are endemic of the Iberian coasts (*Linario polygalifoliae-Vulpion
alopecuri*) and mountains (*Carduo carpetani-Cirsion odontolepidis*,
*Cirsion richterano-chodati*) ([Mucina et al. 2016](#ref-RN4698)). Five
of these alliances had been reported as absent or uncertain in the
Iberian Atlantic territories (*Chenopodion muralis*) or only present in
the Portuguese sector of the area (*Spergulo arvensis-Erodion
cicutariae*, *Allion triquetri*, *Echio-Galactition tomentosae*, *Carduo
carpetani-Cirsion odontolepidis*) by the recently published distribution
maps of vegetation alliances in Europe ([Preislerová et al.
2022](#ref-RN5371)).

On the other hand, our dataset does not support the occurrence in the
Iberian Atlantic territories of nine alliances (*Caucalidion lappulae*,
*Roemerion hybridae*, *Euphorbion prostratae*, *Hordeion murini*,
*Taeniathero-Aegilopion geniculatae*, *Onopordion castellani*,
*Onopordion acanthii*, *Fragarion vescae* and *Aegopodion podagrariae*)
that had been cited as potentially occurring here ([Izco et al.
2000](#ref-RN5363); [Mucina et al. 2016](#ref-RN4698); [Díaz González
2020](#ref-RN5008); [Durán Gómez 2020](#ref-RN5365); [Preislerová et al.
2022](#ref-RN5371)). Of course, the fact that these nine alliances are
not supported by our numerical methods only indicates that they are
poorly represented in our dataset and should not be taken as absolute
proof that they are absent from the Iberian Atlantic territories.

Since our goal was to match the classification to the EuroVegChecklist
([Mucina et al. 2016](#ref-RN4698)), we refrained from merging
recognized alliances or changing their assignation to superior syntaxa.
However, there are some cases that could deserve further scrutiny. For
example, the two wall alliances (*Galio valantiae-Parietarion judaicae*
and *Cymbalario-Asplenion*) had a large overlap in their geographic
distribution, their floristic composition, their proportion of alien
species, their community traits and their ecological preferences. These
two alliances are well recognized in the European literature and they
are generally interpreted as representing the Mediterranean (*Galio
valantiae-Parietarion judaicae*) and temperate (*Cymbalario-Asplenion*)
versions of wall vegetation ([Brullo & Guarino 1998](#ref-RN5369);
[Jasprica et al. 2021](#ref-RN5367)). It is therefore not surprising
that in biogeographic transitional regions - such as the Iberian
Atlantic territories - these two alliances coexist and show a high
overlap.

For habitat classification purposes, we propose that this vegetation
diversity can be summarized into 25 EUNIS habitat types: two constructed
habitats (*J2.5*), three habitats of arable crops and gardens (*V1*), 16
habitats of anthropogenic grasslands (*V3*), two habitats of woodland
clearings and fringes (*R5*) and two habitats of periodically-exposed
shores (*Q61*). In general, we have followed the correspondence between
alliances and EUNIS habitats proposed by the EUNIS expert system
([Chytrý et al. 2020](#ref-RN5061)), except for *Echio-Galactition
tomentosae* which, in the context of the study area, seems to be more
adequately placed in the habitat *V37 Annual anthropogenic herbaceous
vegetation* rather than in the habitat *V33 Dry Mediterranean land with
unpalatable non-vernal herbaceous vegetation*.

## Characterization of anthropogenic communities

We found 22% non-native species (including neophytes and archaeophytes)
in the anthropogenic vegetation of the Iberian Atlantic territories.
This percentage is intermediate between that found in urban areas of
temperate Europe and North America (30-50%) ([Pyšek 1998](#ref-RN5499);
[Clemants & Moore 2003](#ref-RN5500); [La Sorte et al.
2007](#ref-RN5498); [Lososová et al. 2012](#ref-RN5079)) and Italy
(12-26%) ([Celesti-Grapow & Blasi 1998](#ref-RN5501)). A survey of
anthropogenic vegetation in the north-west Balkans found 13% non-native
plants, with more neophytes than archaeophytes ([Šilc et al.
2012](#ref-RN5429)). A similar study in the Czech Republic found 32%
archaeophytes and 7% neophytes ([Simonová & Lososová
2008](#ref-RN5435)). Taken together, these results suggest that the
Iberian Atlantic anthropogenic vegetation shows an incidence of
non-native species that is intermediate between southern and
central-northern Europe, which is in agreement with the biogeographical
position of our study area. Previous studies also suggested that the
non-natives were more frequent in early successional anthropogenic
communities ([Pyšek et al. 2004](#ref-RN5423)) and our results confirmed
this as the proportion of native species tended to be higher in the
perennial ruderal classes *Artemisietea vulgaris* and *Epilobietea
angustifolii*. The classes with more non-native species also tended to
be those adapted to more frequent and more severe disturbances
(*Papaveretea rhoeadis*, *Digitario sanguinalis-Eragrostietea minoris*,
*Sisymbrietea*), also in agreement with previous research ([Simonová &
Lososová 2008](#ref-RN5435)). Archaeophytes had a higher proportion in
the vegetation associated to arable habitats (*Papaveretea rhoeadis*,
*Digitario sanguinalis-Eragrostietea minoris*, *Sisymbrietea*), in
agreement with the ancient origin of archaeophytes during the
development of agriculture ([Zohary 1950](#ref-RN5494); [Preston et al.
2004](#ref-RN5490)). On the other hand, neophytes tended to be in higher
proportions in vegetation types associated to wet conditions
(*Bidentetea*), as has been found in other European regions ([Chytrý et
al. 2008](#ref-RN5497)).

The traits of the Iberian Atlantic anthropogenic communities agreed with
those found in other European regions ([Lososová et al.
2006](#ref-RN2297); [Šilc 2010](#ref-RN5436)), with more annual species
in habitats associated to arable land and more perennials in ruderal
habitats and a general dominance of therophytes and hemicryptophytes in
the species pool ([Tabašević, Lakušić, et al. 2021](#ref-RN5428)). We
found that the main drivers of variation in anthropogenic community
composition was a gradient from open-dry to shady-wet sites, supporting
the importance of the moisture gradient in shaping anthropogenic
vegetation ([Golovanov et al. 2023](#ref-RN5434)). Mesic and moist
human-made habitats of the Iberian Atlantic territories harbor perennial
communities, some of which are especially rich in native species and
have semi-natural characters. At the same time, the wetter habitats have
some of the higher prevalences of non-native species.

# Conclusions

The anthropogenic vegetation of the Iberian Atlantic territories is home
to more than a thousand plant species. This is approximately one third
of the whole regional species pool represented in the SIVIM database
([Font et al. 2012](#ref-RN5374)) and one fifth of the Iberian flora
([Ramos-Gutiérrez et al. 2021](#ref-RN5503)). More than half of this
synanthropic diversity (c. 600 species) occurs in mesic to wet perennial
ruderal vegetation, highlighting the potential of some anthropogenic
habitats as a source of biodiversity in human-dominated landscapes
([Anderson & Minor 2017](#ref-RN5446); [Kowarik 2018](#ref-RN5445)).
These results suggest three main objectives for the sustainable
management of human-made habitats: (1) focusing efforts on alien plant
management in anthropogenic plant communities of wet habitats; (2)
conserving examples of archaeophyte-rich annual weed communities,
especially those linked to traditional agricultural practices ([Meyer et
al. 2013](#ref-RN5502)); and (3) conserving and promoting mesic ruderal
and fringe vegetation as a biodiversity refuge in urban and peri-urban
areas. We hope that our synthesis of the anthropogenic communities of
the Iberian Atlantic territories serves as a contribution towards a
pan-European synthesis of human-made vegetation, a synthesis that could
shed light on the coexistence between humans and plants.

# References

<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body hanging-indent">

<div id="ref-RN5364" class="csl-entry">

Aedo, C., Herrera, M., Fernández Prieto, J., & Díaz González, T. 1988.
<span class="nocase">Datos sobre la vegetación arvense de la Cornisa
Cantábrica</span>. *Lazaroa* 9: 241–254.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5446" class="csl-entry">

Anderson, E.C., & Minor, E.S. 2017. [<span class="nocase">Vacant lots:
an underexplored resource for ecological and social benefits in
cities</span>](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ufug.2016.11.015). *Urban
Forestry & Urban Greening* 21: 146–152.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5491" class="csl-entry">

Bailey, R.G. 2004. [<span class="nocase">Identifying ecoregion
boundaries</span>](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00267-003-0163-6).
*Environmental Management* 34: S14–S26.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5369" class="csl-entry">

Brullo, S., & Guarino, R. 1998. <span class="nocase">Syntaxonomy of the
*Parietarietea judaicae* class in Europe</span>. *Annali di Botanica*
56: 109–146.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5439" class="csl-entry">

Brun, C. 2009. [<span class="nocase">Biodiversity changes in highly
anthropogenic environments (cultivated and ruderal) since the Neolithic
in eastern France</span>](https://doi.org/10.1177/0959683609336559).
*Holocene* 19: 861–871.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN3243" class="csl-entry">

Castroviejo, S. (coord. gen.). 1987-2020. *<span class="nocase">Flora
iberica</span>*. Real Jardín Botánico, CSIC, Madrid.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5444" class="csl-entry">

Celesti‐Grapow, L., Alessandrini, A., Arrigoni, P.V., Banfi, E.,
Bernardo, L., Bovio, M., Brundu, G., Cagiotti, M.R., Camarda, I., Carli,
E., Conti, F., Fascetti, S., Galasso, G., Gubellini, L., La Valva, V.,
Lucchese, F., Marchiori, S., Mazzola, P., Peccenini, S., Poldini, L.,
Pretto, F., Prosser, F., Siniscalco, C., Villani, M.C., Viegi, L.,
Wilhalm, T., & Blasi, C. 2009. [<span class="nocase">Inventory of the
non‐native flora of
Italy</span>](https://doi.org/10.1080/11263500902722824). *Plant
Biosystems* 143: 386–430.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5501" class="csl-entry">

Celesti-Grapow, L., & Blasi, C. 1998. <span class="nocase">A comparison
of the urban flora of different phytoclimatic regions in Italy</span>.
*Global Ecology & Biogeography Letters* 7: 367–378.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5497" class="csl-entry">

Chytrý, M., Maskell, L.C., Pino, J., Pyšek, P., Vilà, M., Font, X., &
Smart, S.M. 2008. [<span class="nocase">Habitat invasions by alien
plants: a quantitative comparison among Mediterranean, subcontinental
and oceanic regions of
Europe</span>](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2664.2007.01398.x).
*Journal of Applied Ecology* 45: 448–458.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5061" class="csl-entry">

Chytrý, M., Tichý, L., Hennekens, S.M., Knollová, I., Janssen, J.A.M.,
Rodwell, J.S., Peterka, T., Marcenò, C., Landucci, F., Danihelka, J.,
Hájek, M., Dengler, J., Novák, P., Zukal, D., Jiménez-Alfaro, B.,
Mucina, L., Abdulhak, S., Aćić, S., Agrillo, E., Attorre, F., Bergmeier,
E., Biurrun, I., Boch, S., Bölöni, J., Bonari, G., Braslavskaya, T.,
Bruelheide, H., Campos, J.A., Čarni, A., Casella, L., Ćuk, M.,
Ćušterevska, R., De Bie, E., Delbosc, P., Demina, O., Didukh, Y., Dítě,
D., Dziuba, T., Ewald, J., Gavilán, R.G., Gégout, J.-C., Giusso del
Galdo, G.P., Golub, V., Goncharova, N., Goral, F., Graf, U., Indreica,
A., Isermann, M., Jandt, U., Jansen, F., Jansen, J., Jašková, A.,
Jiroušek, M., Kącki, Z., Kalníková, V., Kavgacı, A., Khanina, L., Yu.
Korolyuk, A., Kozhevnikova, M., Kuzemko, A., Küzmič, F., Kuznetsov,
O.L., Laiviņš, M., Lavrinenko, I., Lavrinenko, O., Lebedeva, M.,
Lososová, Z., Lysenko, T., Maciejewski, L., Mardari, C., Marinšek, A.,
Napreenko, M.G., Onyshchenko, V., Pérez-Haase, A., Pielech, R.,
Prokhorov, V., Rašomavičius, V., Rodríguez Rojo, M.P., Rūsiņa, S.,
Schrautzer, J., Šibík, J., Šilc, U., Škvorc, Ž., Smagin, V.A., Stančić,
Z., Stanisci, A., Tikhonova, E., Tonteri, T., Uogintas, D., Valachovič,
M., Vassilev, K., Vynokurov, D., Willner, W., Yamalov, S., Evans, D.,
Palitzsch Lund, M., Spyropoulou, R., Tryfon, E., & Schaminée, J.H.J.
2020. [<span class="nocase">EUNIS Habitat Classification: expert system,
characteristic species combinations and distribution maps of European
habitats</span>](https://doi.org/10.1111/avsc.12519). *Applied
Vegetation Science* 23: 648–675.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5500" class="csl-entry">

Clemants, S., & Moore, G. 2003. <span class="nocase">Patterns of species
diversity in eight northeastern United States cities</span>. *Urban
Habitats* 1: 4–16.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5383" class="csl-entry">

De Cáceres, M., Font, X., & Oliva, F. 2010. [<span class="nocase">The
management of vegetation classifications with fuzzy
clustering</span>](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1654-1103.2010.01211.x).
*Journal of Vegetation Science* 21: 1138–1151.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5488" class="csl-entry">

Dengler, J., Jansen, F., Chusova, O., Hüllbusch, E., Nobis, M.P., Van
Meerbeek, K., Axmanová, I., Bruun, H.H., Chytrý, M., Guarino, R.,
Karrer, G., Moeys, K., Raus, T., Steinbauer, M.J., Tichý, L., Tyler, T.,
Batsatsashvili, K., Bita-Nicolae, C., Didukh, Y., Diekmann, M.,
Englisch, T., Fernández-Pascual, E., Frank, D., Graf, U., Hájek, M.,
Jelaska, S.D., Jiménez-Alfaro, B., Julve, P., Nakhutsrishvili, G.,
Ozinga, W.A., Ruprecht, E.-K., Šilc, U., Theurillat, J.-P., & Gillet, F.
2023. [<span class="nocase">﻿Ecological Indicator Values for Europe
(EIVE) 1.0</span>](https://doi.org/10.3897/vcs.98324). *Vegetation
Classification and Survey* 4: 7–29.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5008" class="csl-entry">

Díaz González, T.E. 2020. <span class="nocase">La vegetación del
Principado de Asturias (España)</span>. *Boletín de Ciencias de la
Naturaleza del RIDEA* 55: 339–646.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5360" class="csl-entry">

Díaz González, T.E., Penas Merino, Á., Herrero, L., Pérez Morales, C.,
Llamas García, F., & Terrón Alfonso, A. 1988.
<span class="nocase">Estudio de los herbazales nitrófilos vivaces y
comunidades ruderal viarias de la provincia de León (NW de
España)</span>. *Acta Botanica Barcinonensia* 7: 113–131.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5365" class="csl-entry">

Durán Gómez, J.A. 2020. <span class="nocase">Sintaxonomía de las
comunidades vegetales de Cantabria</span>. *Flora Montiberica* 76:
56–92.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5044" class="csl-entry">

Euro+Med. 2006. <span class="nocase">Euro+Med PlantBase - the
information resource for Euro-Mediterranean plant diversity.
http://ww2.bgbm.org/EuroPlusMed/</span>.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5492" class="csl-entry">

Fernández de Castro, A.G., Navajas, A., & Fagúndez, J. 2018.
[<span class="nocase">Changes in the potential distribution of invasive
plant species in continental Spain in response to climate
change</span>](https://doi.org/10.1080/17550874.2018.1507053). *Plant
Ecology & Diversity* 11: 349–361.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5588" class="csl-entry">

Fernández Prieto, J.A., Amigo, J., Bueno, A., Herrera, M.,
Rodríguez-Guitián, M.A., & Loidi, J. 2023. <span class="nocase">Bosques
y orlas forestales de los territorios atlánticos del Noroeste
Ibérico</span>. *Guineana* 23: 1–240.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5372" class="csl-entry">

Fernández Prieto, J.A., Amigo, J., Bueno, Á., Herrera, M.,
Rodríguez-Guitián, M.A., & Loidi, J. 2020.
<span class="nocase">Justificación de una nueva delimitación de los
territorios iberoatlánticos peninsulares</span>. *Naturalia Cantabricae*
8: 18–24.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5385" class="csl-entry">

FloraVeg.EU. 2023. <span class="nocase">FloraVeg.EU – Database of
European Vegetation, Habitats and Flora. www.floraveg.eu. Accessed
December 2023.</span>

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5374" class="csl-entry">

Font, X., Pérez-García, N., Biurrun, I., Fernández-González, F., &
Lence, C. 2012. <span class="nocase">The Iberian and Macaronesian
Vegetation Information System (SIVIM, www. sivim. info), five years of
online vegetation’s data publishing</span>. *Plant Sociology* 49: 89–95.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5448" class="csl-entry">

Gallego, J.R., Rodríguez-Valdés, E., Esquinas, N., Fernández-Braña, A.,
& Afif, E. 2016. [<span class="nocase">Insights into a 20-ha
multi-contaminated brownfield megasite: an environmental forensics
approach</span>](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2015.09.153).
*Science of The Total Environment* 563-564: 683–692.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5434" class="csl-entry">

Golovanov, Y.M., Abramova, L.M., Arepieva, L.A., Devyatova, E.A., &
Ovcharova, N.V. 2023. [<span class="nocase">Review of plant communities
of the class *Polygono arenastri- Poetea annuae* in the Russian
Federation</span>](https://doi.org/10.14258/turczaninowia.26.2.13).
*Turczaninowia* 26: 147–169.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5381" class="csl-entry">

Herve, M. 2023. <span class="nocase">RVAideMemoire: Testing and Plotting
Procedures for Biostatistics. R package version 0.9-83-2.
https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=RVAideMemoire</span>.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5363" class="csl-entry">

Izco, J., Amigo, J., & García-San León, D. 2000.
<span class="nocase">Análisis y clasificación de la vegetación de
Galicia (España), II. La vegetación herbácea</span>. *Lazaroa* 21:
25–50.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5367" class="csl-entry">

Jasprica, N., Škvorc, Ž., Pandža, M., Milović, M., Purger, D.,
Krstonošić, D., Kovačić, S., Sandev, D., Lasić, A., & Caković, D. 2021.
<span class="nocase">Phytogeographic and syntaxonomic diversity of wall
vegetation ( *Cymbalario-Parietarietea diffusae*) in southeastern
Europe</span>. *Plant Biosystems* 155: 622–631.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN2300" class="csl-entry">

Johnson, A.L., Borowy, D., & Swan, C.M. 2017. [<span class="nocase">Land
use history and seed dispersal drive divergent plant community assembly
patterns in urban vacant
lots</span>](https://doi.org/10.1111/1365-2664.12958). *Journal of
Applied Ecology* 55: 451–460.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5433" class="csl-entry">

Kostryukova, A.M., Mashkova, I.V., Krupnova, T.G., & Shchelkanova, E.E.
2017. [<span class="nocase">Study of synanthropic plants of the south
Ural</span>](https://doi.org/10.21660/2017.40.3519). *International
Journal of Geomate* 13: 60–65.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5445" class="csl-entry">

Kowarik, I. 2018. [<span class="nocase">Urban wilderness: supply,
demand, and access</span>](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ufug.2017.05.017).
*Urban Forestry & Urban Greening* 29: 336–347.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5498" class="csl-entry">

La Sorte, F.A., McKinney, M.L., & Pyšek, P. 2007.
[<span class="nocase">Compositional similarity among urban floras within
and across continents: biogeographical consequences of human-mediated
biotic
interchange</span>](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2486.2007.01329.x).
*Global Change Biology* 13: 913–921.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5493" class="csl-entry">

Lázaro-Lobo, A., Campos, J.A., Díaz González, T.E., Fernández-Pascual,
E., González-García, V., Marchante, H., Romero Buján, M.I., &
Jiménez-Alfaro, B. 2024. [<span class="nocase">An ecoregion-based
approach to evaluate invasive species
pools</span>](https://doi.org/10.3897/neobiota.96.116105). *NeoBiota*
96: 105–128.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN3166" class="csl-entry">

Lê, S., Josse, J., & Husson, F. 2008. <span class="nocase">FactoMineR:
an R package for multivariate analysis</span>. *Journal of Statistical
Software* 25: 1–18.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5451" class="csl-entry">

Lenzner, B., Latombe, G., Schertler, A., Seebens, H., Yang, Q., Winter,
M., Weigelt, P., Kleunen, M. van, Pyšek, P., Pergl, J., Kreft, H.,
Dawson, W., Dullinger, S., & Essl, F. 2022.
[<span class="nocase">Naturalized alien floras still carry the legacy of
European
colonialism</span>](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-022-01865-1). *Nature
Ecology & Evolution* 6: 1723–1732.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5590" class="csl-entry">

Loidi, J., Berastegi, A., Biurrun, I., García-Mijangos, I., & Herrera,
M. 1995. <span class="nocase">Data on *Artemisieta vulgaris* in the
Basque country</span>. *Botanica Helvetica* 105: 165–186.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5589" class="csl-entry">

Loidi, J., Berastegi, A., Biurrun, I., García-Mijangos, I., & Herrera,
M. 1996. [<span class="nocase">Perennial nitrophilous vegetation of the
northern Iberian Peninsula</span>](https://doi.org/10.2307/3236307).
*Journal of Vegetation Science* 7: 575–584.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5591" class="csl-entry">

Loidi, J., & Navarro Aranda, C. 1988. <span class="nocase">Datos sobre
las alianzas *Dauco-Melilotion* Görs 1966 y *Convolvulion sepium* R. Tx.
1947 en el País Vasco</span>. *Acta Botanica Barcinonensia* 37: 257–264.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN2297" class="csl-entry">

Lososová, Z., Chytrý, M., Kühn, I., Hájek, O., Horáková, V., Pyšek, P.,
& Tichý, L. 2006. [<span class="nocase">Patterns of plant traits in
annual vegetation of man-made habitats in central
Europe</span>](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.PPEES.2006.07.001).
*Perspectives in Plant Ecology, Evolution and Systematics* 8: 69–81.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5079" class="csl-entry">

Lososová, Z., Chytrý, M., Tichý, L., Danihelka, J., Fajmon, K., Hájek,
O., Kintrová, K., Kühn, I., Láníková, D., Otýpková, Z., & Řehořek, V.
2012. [<span class="nocase">Native and alien floras in urban habitats: a
comparison across 32 cities of central
Europe</span>](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1466-8238.2011.00704.x).
*Global Ecology and Biogeography* 21: 545–555.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5441" class="csl-entry">

Lososová, Z., & Simonová, D. 2008. [<span class="nocase">Changes during
the 20th century in species composition of synanthropic vegetation in
Moravia (Czech Republic)</span>](<Go to ISI>://WOS:000259902900004).
*Preslia* 80: 291–305.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5449" class="csl-entry">

Matanzas, N., Afif, E., Díaz González, T.E., & Gallego, J.R. 2021.
[<span class="nocase">Phytoremediation potential of native herbaceous
plant species growing on a paradigmatic brownfield
site</span>](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11270-021-05234-9). *Water, Air, &
Soil Pollution* 232: 290.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5502" class="csl-entry">

Meyer, S., Wesche, K., Krause, B., & Leuschner, C. 2013.
[<span class="nocase">Dramatic losses of specialist arable plants in
Central Germany since the 1950s/60s – a cross-regional
analysis</span>](https://doi.org/10.1111/ddi.12102). *Diversity and
Distributions* 19: 1175–1187.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5101" class="csl-entry">

Midolo, G., Herben, T., Axmanová, I., Marcenò, C., Pätsch, R.,
Bruelheide, H., Karger, D.N., Aćić, S., Bergamini, A., Bergmeier, E.,
Biurrun, I., Bonari, G., Čarni, A., Chiarucci, A., De Sanctis, M.,
Demina, O., Dengler, J., Dziuba, T., Fanelli, G., Garbolino, E., Giusso
del Galdo, G., Goral, F., Güler, B., Hinojos-Mendoza, G., Jansen, F.,
Jiménez-Alfaro, B., Lengyel, A., Lenoir, J., Pérez-Haase, A., Pielech,
R., Prokhorov, V., Rašomavičius, V., Ruprecht, E., Rūsiņa, S., Šilc, U.,
Škvorc, Ž., Stančić, Z., Tatarenko, I., & Chytrý, M. 2023.
[<span class="nocase">Disturbance indicator values for European
plants</span>](https://doi.org/10.1111/geb.13603). *Global Ecology and
Biogeography* 32: 24–34.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN4698" class="csl-entry">

Mucina, L., Bültmann, H., Dierßen, K., Theurillat, J.-P., Raus, T.,
Čarni, A., Šumberová, K., Willner, W., Dengler, J., García, R.G.,
Chytrý, M., Hájek, M., Di Pietro, R., Iakushenko, D., Pallas, J.,
Daniëls, F.J.A., Bergmeier, E., Santos Guerra, A., Ermakov, N.,
Valachovič, M., Schaminée, J.H.J., Lysenko, T., Didukh, Y.P., Pignatti,
S., Rodwell, J.S., Capelo, J., Weber, H.E., Solomeshch, A., Dimopoulos,
P., Aguiar, C., Hennekens, S.M., & Tichý, L. 2016.
[<span class="nocase">Vegetation of Europe: hierarchical floristic
classification system of vascular plant, bryophyte, lichen, and algal
communities</span>](https://doi.org/10.1111/avsc.12257). *Applied
Vegetation Science* 19: 3–264.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5426" class="csl-entry">

Němec, R., Lososová, Z., Dřevojan, P., & Žáková, K. 2011.
[<span class="nocase">Synanthropic vegetation of the *Eragrostion
cilianensi-minoris* alliance in the Czech
Republic</span>](https://doi.org/10.2478/s11756-011-0108-0). *Biologia*
66: 1019–1026.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN4667" class="csl-entry">

Olson, D.M., Dinerstein, E., Wikramanayake, E.D., Burgess, N.D., Powell,
G.V., Underwood, E.C., D’amico, J.A., Itoua, I., Strand, H.E., &
Morrison, J.C. 2001. <span class="nocase">Terrestrial ecoregions of the
world: a new map of life on earth: a new global map of terrestrial
ecoregions provides an innovative tool for conserving
biodiversity</span>. *BioScience* 51: 933–938.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5527" class="csl-entry">

Pauleit, S., & Breuste, J.H. 2011. [<span class="nocase">Land-Use and
Surface-Cover as Urban Ecological
Indicators</span>](https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199563562.003.0004).
In Niemelä, J., Breuste, J.H., Elmqvist, T., Guntenspergen, G., James,
P., & McIntyre, N.E. (eds.), *<span class="nocase">Urban Ecology:
Patterns, Processes, and Applications</span>*, pp. 19–30. Oxford
University Press.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5359" class="csl-entry">

Penas Merino, Á., Díaz González, T.E., García González, M.E., López
Pacheco, M.J., Puente García, E.M., & Herrero Cembranos, L. 1988.
<span class="nocase">Datos sobre los cardales y tobales (*Onopordetea
acanthi*) en la provincia de León</span>. *Lazaroa* 10: 987–88.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5361" class="csl-entry">

Penas Merino, Á., Díaz González, T.E., Pérez Morales, C., Puente García,
E., García González, M.E., & Terrón Alfonso, A. 1988.
<span class="nocase">Aportaciones al conocimiento de las comunidades de
malas hierbas de cultivo en la provincia de León</span>. *Acta Botanica
Barcinonensia* 37: 317–330.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5504" class="csl-entry">

Pokorná, A., Kočár, P., Novák, J., Šálková, T., Žáčková, P., Komárková,
V., Vaněček, Z., & Sádlo, J. 2018. <span class="nocase">Ancient and
Early Medieval man-made habitats in the Czech Republic: colonization
history and vegetation changes</span>. *Preslia* 90: 171–193.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5376" class="csl-entry">

POWO. 2023. <span class="nocase">Plants of the World Online. Facilitated
by the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. Published on the Internet;
http://www.plantsoftheworldonline.org/ Retrieved September 2022.</span>

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5371" class="csl-entry">

Preislerová, Z., Jiménez-Alfaro, B., Mucina, L., Berg, C., Bonari, G.,
Kuzemko, A., Landucci, F., Marcenò, C., Monteiro-Henriques, T., Novák,
P., Vynokurov, D., Bergmeier, E., Dengler, J., Apostolova, I., Bioret,
F., Biurrun, I., Campos, J.A., Capelo, J., Čarni, A., Çoban, S., Csiky,
J., Ćuk, M., Ćušterevska, R., Daniëls, F.J.A., De Sanctis, M., Didukh,
Y., Dítě, D., Fanelli, G., Golovanov, Y., Golub, V., Guarino, R., Hájek,
M., Iakushenko, D., Indreica, A., Jansen, F., Jašková, A., Jiroušek, M.,
Kalníková, V., Kavgacı, A., Kucherov, I., Küzmič, F., Lebedeva, M.,
Loidi, J., Lososová, Z., Lysenko, T., Milanović, Đ., Onyshchenko, V.,
Perrin, G., Peterka, T., Rašomavičius, V., Rodríguez-Rojo, M.P.,
Rodwell, J.S., Rūsiņa, S., Sánchez-Mata, D., Schaminée, J.H.J.,
Semenishchenkov, Y., Shevchenko, N., Šibík, J., Škvorc, Ž., Smagin, V.,
Stešević, D., Stupar, V., Šumberová, K., Theurillat, J.-P., Tikhonova,
E., Tzonev, R., Valachovič, M., Vassilev, K., Willner, W., Yamalov, S.,
Večeřa, M., & Chytrý, M. 2022. [<span class="nocase">Distribution maps
of vegetation alliances in
Europe</span>](https://doi.org/10.1111/avsc.12642). *Applied Vegetation
Science* 25: e12642.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5490" class="csl-entry">

Preston, C.D., Pearman, D.A., & Hall, A.R. 2004.
[<span class="nocase">Archaeophytes in
Britain</span>](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1095-8339.2004.00284.x).
*Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society* 145: 257–294.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5499" class="csl-entry">

Pyšek, P. 1998. [<span class="nocase">Alien and native species in
Central European urban floras: a quantitative
comparison</span>](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2699.1998.251177.x).
*Journal of Biogeography* 25: 155–163.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5423" class="csl-entry">

Pyšek, P., Chocholousková, Z., Pyšek, A., Jarosík, V., Chytry, M., &
Tichy, L. 2004. [<span class="nocase">Trends in species diversity and
composition of urban vegetation over three
decades</span>](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1654-1103.2004.tb02321.x).
*Journal of Vegetation Science* 15: 781–788.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5626" class="csl-entry">

Pyšek, P., Sádlo, J., Chrtek, J., Chytry, M., Kaplan, Z., Pergl, J.,
Pokorná, A., Axmanová, I., Čuda, J., Doležal, J., Dřevojan, P., Hejda,
M., Kočár, P., Kortz, A., Lososová, Z., Lustyk, P., Skálová, H.,
Štajerová, K., Večeřa, M., Vítková, M., Wild, J., & Danihelka, J. 2022.
[<span class="nocase">Catalogue of alien plants of the Czech Republic
(3rd edition): species richness, status, distributions, habitats,
regional invasion levels, introduction pathways and
impacts</span>](https://doi.org/10.23855/preslia.2022.447). *Preslia*
94: 447–577.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5387" class="csl-entry">

R Core Team. 2023. [<span class="nocase">R: a language and environment
for statistical computing. Version
4.3.1</span>](https://www.r-project.org/).

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5503" class="csl-entry">

Ramos-Gutiérrez, I., Lima, H., Pajarón, S., Romero-Zarco, C., Sáez, L.,
Pataro, L., Molina-Venegas, R., Rodríguez, M.Á., & Moreno-Saiz, J.C.
2021. [<span class="nocase">Atlas of the vascular flora of the Iberian
Peninsula biodiversity hotspot
(AFLIBER)</span>](https://doi.org/10.1111/geb.13363). *Global Ecology
and Biogeography* 30: 1951–1957.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN4697" class="csl-entry">

Rivas-Martínez, S., Fernández-González, F., Loidi, J., Lousã, M., &
Penas Merino, Á. 2001. <span class="nocase">Syntaxonomical checklist of
vascular plant communities of Spain and Portugal to association
level</span>. *Itinera Geobotanica* 14: 5–341.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5592" class="csl-entry">

Rivas-Martínez, S., Penas Merino, Á., Del Río, S., Sánchez Mata, D., &
Díaz González, T.E. 2014. <span class="nocase">Biogeographic map of
Europe. Third concise advance</span>. *XXIV Jornadas Internacionales de
Fitosociología y I Congreso de la Sociedad Española de Geobotánica*

</div>

<div id="ref-RN4699" class="csl-entry">

Rivas-Martínez, S., Penas Merino, Á., Díaz González, T.E., Cantó, P.,
Del Río, S., Costa, J.C., Herrero, L., & Molero, J. 2017.
<span class="nocase">Biogeographic units of the Iberian Peninsula and
Baelaric Islands to district level. A concise synopsis</span>. In Loidi,
J. (ed.), *<span class="nocase">The Vegetation of the Iberian
Peninsula</span>*, pp. 131–188. Springer.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN2311" class="csl-entry">

Roberts, D.W. 2016. <span class="nocase">labdsv: Ordination and
Multivariate Analysis for Ecology. R package version 1.8-0</span>.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5379" class="csl-entry">

Roleček, J., Tichý, L., Zelený, D., & Chytrý, M. 2009.
[<span class="nocase">Modified TWINSPAN classification in which the
hierarchy respects cluster
heterogeneity</span>](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1654-1103.2009.01062.x).
*Journal of Vegetation Science* 20: 596–602.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5436" class="csl-entry">

Šilc, U. 2010. [<span class="nocase">Synanthropic vegetation: pattern of
various disturbances on life history
traits</span>](<Go to ISI>://WOS:000290511700006). *Acta Botanica
Croatica* 69: 215–227.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5429" class="csl-entry">

Šilc, U., Vrbničanin, S., Božić, D., Čarni, A., & Stevanović, Z. 2012.
[<span class="nocase">Alien plant species and factors of invasiveness of
anthropogenic vegetation in the Northwestern Balkans - a
phytosociological
approach</span>](https://doi.org/10.2478/s11535-012-0049-9). *Central
European Journal of Biology* 7: 720–730.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5435" class="csl-entry">

Simonová, D., & Lososová, Z. 2008. [<span class="nocase">Which factors
determine plant invasions in man-made habitats in the Czech
Republic?</span>](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ppees.2007.11.003)
*Perspectives in Plant Ecology, Evolution and Systematics* 10: 89–100.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5447" class="csl-entry">

Song, Y., Kirkwood, N., Maksimović, Č., Zheng, X., O’Connor, D., Jin,
Y., & Hou, D. 2019. [<span class="nocase">Nature based solutions for
contaminated land remediation and brownfield redevelopment in cities: a
review</span>](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.01.347).
*Science of The Total Environment* 663: 568–579.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5440" class="csl-entry">

Stefanon, M., Schindler, S., Drobinski, P., Noblet-Ducoudre, N. de, &
D’Andrea, F. 2014. [<span class="nocase">Simulating the effect of
anthropogenic vegetation land cover on heatwave temperatures over
central France</span>](https://doi.org/10.3354/cr01230). *Climate
Research* 60: 133–146.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5450" class="csl-entry">

Straus, L.G. 2005. [<span class="nocase">The Upper Paleolithic of
Cantabrian Spain</span>](https://doi.org/10.1002/evan.20067).
*Evolutionary Anthropology: Issues, News, and Reviews* 14: 145–158.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5505" class="csl-entry">

Swan, C.M., Brown, B., Borowy, D., Cavender-Bares, J., Jeliazkov, A.,
Knapp, S., Lososová, Z., Padullés Cubino, J., Pavoine, S., Ricotta, C.,
& Sol, D. 2021. [<span class="nocase">A framework for understanding how
biodiversity patterns unfold across multiple spatial scales in urban
ecosystems</span>](https://doi.org/10.1002/ecs2.3650). *Ecosphere* 12:
e03650.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5424" class="csl-entry">

Tabašević, M., Jovanović, S., Lakušić, D., Vukojičić, S., & Kuzmanović,
N. 2021. [<span class="nocase">Diversity of ruderal communities in urban
environments-a case study from Serbia (SE
Europe)</span>](https://doi.org/10.3390/d13120638). *Diversity-Basel*
13: 638.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5428" class="csl-entry">

Tabašević, M., Lakušić, D., Kuzmanović, N., Vukojičić, S., Glisic, M., &
Jovanović, S. 2021. [<span class="nocase">Ruderal vegetation in
Serbia-diversity and floristic
composition</span>](https://doi.org/10.2298/botserb2102251t). *Botanica
Serbica* 45: 251–261.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5593" class="csl-entry">

Tichý, L., Chytrý, M., & Botta-Dukát, Z. 2014.
[<span class="nocase">Semi-supervised classification of vegetation:
preserving the good old units and searching for new
ones</span>](https://doi.org/10.1111/jvs.12193). *Journal of Vegetation
Science* 25: 1504–1512.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5378" class="csl-entry">

Uría Arizaga, O. 2020. <span class="nocase">Ensamblaje de comunidades
vegetales en parcelas urbanas abandonadas de Asturias</span>. *Trabajo
Fin de Máster, Universidad de Oviedo*

</div>

<div id="ref-RN4662" class="csl-entry">

Wickham, H., Averick, M., Bryan, J., Chang, W., McGowan, L., François,
R., Grolemund, G., Hayes, A., Henry, L., & Hester, J. 2019.
<span class="nocase">Welcome to the Tidyverse</span>. *Journal of Open
Source Software* 4: 1686.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5382" class="csl-entry">

Wiser, S.K., & De Cáceres, M. 2013. [<span class="nocase">Updating
vegetation classifications: an example with New Zealand’s woody
vegetation</span>](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1654-1103.2012.01450.x).
*Journal of Vegetation Science* 24: 80–93.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5377" class="csl-entry">

Zabaleta Mendizábal, I. 1990. <span class="nocase">Flora y vegetación de
La Felguera (Langreo) y sus alrededores.</span> *Tesina de Licenciatura,
Universidad de Oviedo.*

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5422" class="csl-entry">

Zaliberová, M. 1995. [<span class="nocase">Ruderal vegetation in
Biosphere Reserve East
Carpathians</span>](<Go to ISI>://WOS:A1995TR85100005).
*Ekologia-Bratislava* 14: 29–33.

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5380" class="csl-entry">

Zelený, D. 2021. <span class="nocase">twinspanR: TWo-way INdicator
SPecies ANalysis (and its modified version) in R. R package version
0.22.</span>

</div>

<div id="ref-RN5494" class="csl-entry">

Zohary, M. 1950. [<span class="nocase">The segetal plant communities of
Palestine</span>](http://www.jstor.org/stable/20034504). *Vegetatio* 2:
387–411.

</div>

</div>

# Supplementary Information

**Appendix S1** Checklist of anthropogenic syntaxa that could be present
in the Iberian Atlantic territories according to the literature. Syntaxa
names are provided as recorded by the original authors of the vegetation
plot. The file indicates if the presence of the syntaxon in the Iberian
Atlantic territories was validated or not by our analysis.

**Appendix S2** Original publications providing the vegetation plots
stored in SIVIM and used in our analysis. Reference details are provided
as they are in the SIVIM database.

**Appendix S3** Description of the 25 alliances present in the
anthropogenic vegetation of the northwestern Iberian Peninsula, and
correspondence with regionalized level 4 EUNIS habitats.

**Appendix S4** Characteristic species combinations of the anthropogenic
vegetation alliances in spreadsheet format, divided into diagnostic,
constant and dominant species. The values are as follows: Diagnostic
species = *IndVal* multiplied by 100; Constant species = percentage
occurrence frequency (constancy); Dominant species = percentage
frequency of plots in which the species occurs with a cover larger than
25%.

**Appendix S5** Synoptic table of the anthropogenic communities found in
NW Iberia.

**Appendix S6** Revised checklist of vegetation associations described
in the regional literature and belonging to the 25 alliances present in
the Iberian Atlantic anthropogenic vegetation.

# Figures

<div class="figure">

<img src="../results/figures/F1 - maps.png" alt="Anthropogenic vegetation alliances of the Iberian Atlantic territories. Each dot is a vegetation plot. Dot colors indicate the vegetation class." width="4251" />
<p class="caption">
Anthropogenic vegetation alliances of the Iberian Atlantic territories.
Each dot is a vegetation plot. Dot colors indicate the vegetation class.
</p>

</div>

<div class="figure">

<img src="../results/figures/F2 - pca.png" alt="Floristic diversity of the anthropogenic plant communities of the Iberian Atlantic territories. Biplots produced by Principal Component Analysis (PCA) with Hellinger transformation. PCAs were conducted for the whole vegetation (A) and for specific subsets (B-F). Colors indicate the vegetation class." width="4251" />
<p class="caption">
Floristic diversity of the anthropogenic plant communities of the
Iberian Atlantic territories. Biplots produced by Principal Component
Analysis (PCA) with Hellinger transformation. PCAs were conducted for
the whole vegetation (A) and for specific subsets (B-F). Colors indicate
the vegetation class.
</p>

</div>

<div class="figure">

<img src="../results/figures/F3 - origins.png" alt="Proportion of neophytes, archaeophytes and native species in the anthropogenic plant communities of the Iberian Atlantic territories. Each bar represents the plot-level average proportion of neophytes (dark shade), archaeophytes (medium shade) and natives (light shade) in each vegetation alliance. Colors indicate the vegetation class." width="4251" />
<p class="caption">
Proportion of neophytes, archaeophytes and native species in the
anthropogenic plant communities of the Iberian Atlantic territories.
Each bar represents the plot-level average proportion of neophytes (dark
shade), archaeophytes (medium shade) and natives (light shade) in each
vegetation alliance. Colors indicate the vegetation class.
</p>

</div>

<div class="figure">

<img src="../results/figures/F4 - lifeforms.png" alt="Proportion of therophytes, hemicryptophytes, geophytes and other life forms (chamaephytes, phanerophytes, bryophytes, hydrophytes) in the anthropogenic plant communities of the Iberian Atlantic territories. Each bar represents the plot-level average proportion of therophytes (dark shade),hemicryptophytes (medium-dark shade), geophytes (medium-light shade) and other life forms (light shade) in each vegetation alliance. Colors indicate the vegetation class." width="4251" />
<p class="caption">
Proportion of therophytes, hemicryptophytes, geophytes and other life
forms (chamaephytes, phanerophytes, bryophytes, hydrophytes) in the
anthropogenic plant communities of the Iberian Atlantic territories.
Each bar represents the plot-level average proportion of therophytes
(dark shade),hemicryptophytes (medium-dark shade), geophytes
(medium-light shade) and other life forms (light shade) in each
vegetation alliance. Colors indicate the vegetation class.
</p>

</div>

<div class="figure">

<img src="../results/figures/F5 - height-flowering.png" alt="Vegetation height and flowering phenology of the anthropogenic plant communities of the Iberian Atlantic territories. Boxplots show the community-weighted mean for plant height, median month of flowering and length of the flowering season for each vegetation alliance. Colors indicate the vegetation class. Alliances as ordered as in Figures 1 and 3-4 and alliance numbers are the same as listed in Appendix S3." width="4251" />
<p class="caption">
Vegetation height and flowering phenology of the anthropogenic plant
communities of the Iberian Atlantic territories. Boxplots show the
community-weighted mean for plant height, median month of flowering and
length of the flowering season for each vegetation alliance. Colors
indicate the vegetation class. Alliances as ordered as in Figures 1 and
3-4 and alliance numbers are the same as listed in Appendix S3.
</p>

</div>

<div class="figure">

<img src="../results/figures/F6 - indicators.png" alt="Ecological requirements of the anthropogenic plant communities of the Iberian Atlantic territories. Boxplots show the plot-level means for the ecological indicator values of temperature, moisture, light, nutrients, soil reaction, disturbance frequency and disturbance severity, calculated for each vegetation alliance. Colors indicate the vegetation class. Alliances as ordered as in Figures 1 and 3-4 and alliance numbers are the same as listed in Appendix S3." width="4251" />
<p class="caption">
Ecological requirements of the anthropogenic plant communities of the
Iberian Atlantic territories. Boxplots show the plot-level means for the
ecological indicator values of temperature, moisture, light, nutrients,
soil reaction, disturbance frequency and disturbance severity,
calculated for each vegetation alliance. Colors indicate the vegetation
class. Alliances as ordered as in Figures 1 and 3-4 and alliance numbers
are the same as listed in Appendix S3.
</p>

</div>

<div class="figure">

<img src="../results/figures/F7 - pca.png" alt="Ecological requirements of the anthropogenic plant communities of the Iberian Atlantic territories. Biplot produced by Principal Component Analysis (PCA) of the plot-level means for the ecological indicator values of temperature, moisture, light, nutrients, soil reaction, disturbance frequency and disturbance severity. Each dot is a plot. In the left panel, labels and arrows indicate the contribution of each indicator to the first and second principal components. The right panels show the space occupied by each vegetation class (colored dots) with respect to the whole anthropogenic vegetation (grey dots)." width="4228" />
<p class="caption">
Ecological requirements of the anthropogenic plant communities of the
Iberian Atlantic territories. Biplot produced by Principal Component
Analysis (PCA) of the plot-level means for the ecological indicator
values of temperature, moisture, light, nutrients, soil reaction,
disturbance frequency and disturbance severity. Each dot is a plot. In
the left panel, labels and arrows indicate the contribution of each
indicator to the first and second principal components. The right panels
show the space occupied by each vegetation class (colored dots) with
respect to the whole anthropogenic vegetation (grey dots).
</p>

</div>
